This repository includes my summaries of some of the book chapters and articles
that I've been reading. While I sometimes employ graphical modeling languages
for this purpose when working with pen and paper, the texts included here have
invariably been written as retellings of the source material in a way that I
would explain it to myself. The style is usually informal, and I tend to omit
very specific claims, preferring, for example, to stick to qualifications like
'linearithmic' as opposed to mentioning the precise number of compares made in
the worst case by some sorting algorithm. The emphasis, instead, is on
presenting an argument that proceeds from the ground up to clarify the essential
concepts and their relations, and to show why certain decisions have been made
regarding their design and how these bear on whatever final conclusions have
been reached at. This is to be contrasted with fact sheets intended solely for
the purpose of memorization, as well as with the use of more spatially oriented
designs such as mind- and concept maps.

I have chosen to use a plain ASCII format for my summaries, as opposed to, e.g.,
LaTeX, DocBook or AsciiDoc. In particular, I would like to minimize the amount
of effort needed for maintenance, viewing the fruits of these efforts solely as
raw materials that require further processing into something more original
before considering circulation using one of the more sophisticated formats just
mentioned.

Wherever I have literally quoted some passage from the source material, I have
made it clear that I did as such. I have, in general, not asked for permission
to openly publish my summaries, and if you're the author of some of the
materials that I've covered and would like me to remove my derivatives, I will
do so upon request.


Arno Bastenhof
